Troubleshooting guide for PLC IDE [HC-1289] (#206)
arduino/help-center-content: content/Software Support/PLC IDE/If-youre-having-trouble-connecting-a-device-to-PLC-IDE.md

---
title: "If you're having trouble connecting a device to PLC IDE"
---

## Check this first

> * If you haven't done so, start by checking the [Arduino PLC IDE Setup and Board's License Activation](https://docs.arduino.cc/software/plc-ide/tutorials/plc-ide-setup-license#7-license-activation-with-pre-licensed-products-opta) tutorial.

Author: Indeed! Nice catch 👍

1. Select **View > Devices by container**.
1. Look for an **Arduino Opta** or **Portenta H7 MCUboot** container.
1. Click to expand the container:

   ![Arduino Opta ports in Device Manager.](img/device-manager.png)

1. Look for **USB Serial Device** items, and note the port names.

---

## Solutions for specific problems

### If the "On-Line > Set up communications" and "On-line > Connect" options are disabled

These options are only available when a project is open. Select **File > New Project** to create a new project.

### Error: “Unable to start the communication”

When choosing **On-line > Set up communications** you may get this error message:

```
Unable to start the communication
Choose 'On-line / Set up communication' to configure it
```

Resolve the issue by selecting **On-line > Set up communication** and checking the settings. See [Connect to the Device](https://docs.arduino.cc/software/plc-ide/tutorials/plc-ide-setup-license#5-connect-to-the-device) for help.

### Error: Cannot download sketch file (error code: 1)

When downloading the runtime sketch, you may get this error:

```
Cannot download sketch file (error code: 1)
```

Follow these steps:

> 1. Double-tap the reset button on the device to set it to **bootloader mode**, and try downloading the sketch again.
> 1. Ensure other applications are not blocking the port, for example the Serial Monitor in Arduino IDE.
> 1. Check the port selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Double-tap the reset button on the device to set it to **bootloader mode**, and try downloading the sketch again.
2. Close any applications that may be blocking the port, such as the serial monitor in Arduino IDE.
3. [Check the port selection](#about-ports).
```
Step 2.: This way it is more clear that users should close any applications that might be blocking the port.
Step 3.: It can be useful to add a link back to the section explaining how to check the port selection since some users might not read it before arriving at this point.

### If nothing happens when downloading the runtime sketch

1. Ensure you've installed the **Arduino PLC IDE Tools** from the [Arduino Software page](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software#arduino-plc-ide).
2. Restart PLC IDE.

### Error: "(DownloadSketch) Can not download sketch: COM port must be used!"

When downloading the runtime sketch, this error may appear in the console:

```
(DownloadSketch) Can not download sketch: COM port must be used!
```

It can occur if the wrong port is selected in the manual sketch download widget. If you're unsure which port to use, see [About ports in PLC IDE](#about-ports).

> 
> ### Error: "Cannot download sketch file (error code: 1)"
> 
> When downloading the runtime sketch, this error may occur:
> 
> ```
> Cannot download sketch file (error code: 1)
> ```
> 
> Try this:
> 
> 1. Close any applications that may be blocking the port, such as the serial monitor in Arduino IDE.
> 2. Try downloading the runtime with your device in **bootloader mode** (double-press the reset button).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This error is already explained above.
